5/28/25, 6:04 PM

"Nerve Gas Stonew all"

"Nerve Gas Stonewall"
Tuesday, October 8, 1996; Page A18
The Washington Post
FOR FIVE years, the Pentagon insisted that no troops were exposed to chemical weapons during the gulf war. Strong
evidence now points to a contrary conclusion. The staff of an independent presidential commission believes that the
Pentagon's prolonged failure to search for or consider relevant evidence that might undermine its early assumptions "has
served to gravely undermine the credibility" of Defense Department inquiries. The staff further concluded -- correctly -that an outside body now should take over.
This is a vital matter for thousands of military men and women who believe their current ill health can be traced to service
in the Persian Gulf in 1990 and 1991. More than 30,000 out of the 700,000 who went to the gulf region during the war
against Iraq have enrolled in a medical registry, and many more may have complaints. Reported symptoms -- including
chronic and debilitating fatigue, skin rashes, memory loss, joint pain and more -- are frustratingly varied and so far do not
point to any single syndrome, illness or cause. Some investigators believe stress may play a role. Others are not
convinced that the incidence of ill health among gulf war veterans is higher than in the general population.
But unquestionably the suffering of many of these veterans is real, and the government has an obligation to pursue any
lead that might shed light on their conditions. That is why the years of stonewalling -- not a coverup as much as a
reluctance to investigate -- are so damaging. Until recently, the Pentagon insisted that because no soldiers reported acute
nerve-gas symptoms during the war, there can have been no exposure.
But now, in part thanks to a United Nations report that was available as early as 1992, the Defense Department
acknowledges that some troops may have been exposed inadvertently to nerve gas days after the war, when U.S. forces
were blowing up Iraqi arsenals that they believed at the time to contain only conventional weapons. Pentagon spokesmen
first admitted that a few hundred Army engineers might have been exposed to low levels of gas, then upped the number
to several thousand, then to "a very large number," likely more than 15,000.
It is important to note that release of gas does not necessarily mean there was exposure, and exposure may well have
caused no illness. There is no evidence that brief, low-level exposure to nerve gas, causing no immediate ill effects, leads
to any chronic disability. But it also is true that little is known about the subject; more aggressive Pentagon inquiries
would have led to earlier commencement of relevant research.
The Presidential Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans' Illnesses is likely to praise some aspects of the government's
response to the baffling gulf war illnesses in its final report later this year. Already many commissions have met, and many
research projects are underway. But the Pentagon's handling of the chemical-weapons issue -- including its inflexibility
and its "slow, reluctant, on-again-off-again release of information" -- has "fallen short of the mark," committee staff found.
Gulf war veterans now deserve an independent investigation of this matter.
© Copyright 1996 The Washington Post Company
Return to Gulf Clippings Index ---- Return to Jim Turner's page ----

w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/961008-w p.htm

1/1

