5/28/25, 5:59 PM

CNN - Pentagon chief criticizes Gulf War record-keeping - Mar. 5, 1997

Pentagon chief criticizes Gulf War record-keeping
But Cohen pledges 'thorough' investigation
March 5, 1997

In this story:
'It's not been well handled'
Change in investigators not a criticism
From Military Affairs Correspondent Jamie McIntyre
STUTTGART, Germany (CNN) -- Defense Secretary William Cohen said Wednesday he is disappointed that most Gulf
War chemical weapons logs are missing but he expressed confidence that the Pentagon is conducting a thorough
investigation of the matter.
While critical of the military's record-keeping, Cohen promised to "pursue all the leads that we can" to find missing logs
that tracked chemical warfare during the Persian Gulf War.
"I think there's general disappointment with the level of record-keeping that took place," Cohen told reporters traveling
with him in Germany on his first trip abroad as Pentagon chief.

'It's not been well handled'
"Obviously, it's not been well handled," Cohen said of the disappearance of most of the records kept by U.S.
commanders during the 1991 war.
On Monday, Cohen ordered the Pentagon's inspector general to investigate the mishandling.
A separate Pentagon team investigating the missing files said in a preliminary report last week that more than threequarters of the records are missing even though multiple copies had been stored in safes at U.S. military bases after the
war.
The records are being sought as part of the wider investigation into effects of chemical weapons on U.S. soldiers during
the war.

Change in investigators not a criticism
Cohen said the decision to have the Defense Department's inspector general take over the matter does not reflect a lack
of confidence in Bernard Rostker, the Pentagon official whose team conducted the preliminary investigation.
"While our study is incomplete and will now be continued by the (inspector general), I have seen no evidence thus far
that anyone intentionally destroyed the log," Rostker said on Monday.
Cohen said on Wednesday he saw "true dedication on the part of Bernie Rostker and others to get to the bottom of the
entire affair."
"We'll pursue all the leads that we can and whatever bad news there is we will dig through and make public. I'm satisfied
we are making a very honest thorough effort to get to the facts," Cohen said.
w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/0305-cnn.htm

1/2

5/28/25, 5:59 PM

CNN - Pentagon chief criticizes Gulf War record-keeping - Mar. 5, 1997

© 1997 Cable News Network, Inc.
All Rights Reserved.
Return to Gulf Clippings Index ---- Return to Jim Turner's page ----

w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/0305-cnn.htm

2/2

