5/28/25, 5:51 PM

Gulf Illness Treated "Cavalierly" -- Schw arzkopf Says He Made Errors

Gulf Illness Treated "Cavalierly" -- Schwarzkopf Says He made Errors.
USA Today, September 15, 1997, page A5
By Norm Brewer and John Hanchette, Gannett News Service.
Washington - Gulf War Illnesses in the years following the 1991 conflict with Iraq were handled rather "cavalierly" by the
Pentagon, says retired general Norman Schwarzkopf, who led the troops who now say they are sick. Schwarzkopf also
told Gannett News Service that he regretted not telling senators earlier this year about a chemical weapons case involving
an Ohio soldier. Unpublished battlefront reports showing that Schwarzkopf knew about the soldier in 1991 raised
questions about why he told Congress this year that he had no knowledge of anyone being exposed to chemical
weapons.
The commanding general of Desert Storm has been a defender of the war and an advocate of helping sick veterans. But
he previously has shied from criticizing the Pentagon's investigation of why more than 100,000 Gulf War Veterans report
being sick. "When the initial reports (of illness) were coming in it was taken somewhat lightly by some people in the
Department of Defense," said Schwarzkopf, who later said he wanted to amend "cavalierly" to say: "It wasn't taken as
seriously as it could have been." But, he said, that changed with the 1996 appointment of Bernard Rostker to head the
Pentagon's probe.
Department of Veteran's Affairs doctors also have failed to believe veterans are sick, Schwarzkopf said. The chemical
weapons incident involved Pfc. David Fisher of the 3rd Armored Division, who was crawling through a destroyed Iraqi
bunker when he came into contact with munitions that blistered his upper arm. Schwarzkopf was told of Fisher's case on
March 3, 1991, in a field report from Army VII Corps officers.
"CINC (commander in chief Schwarzkopf) did not want us to make a big deal out of one soldier suffering chemical agent
burns," the report says. "Don't deny the report to the press." But in Senate testimony in January and February,
Schwarzkopf passed up several opportunities to tell of it. "We never had a single report, number one, of verified
chemicals and, number two, of anyone ever showing any symptoms consistent with nerve agent poisoning," he told the
Armed Services Committee. He told the Veteran's Affairs Committee, "We never had a single symptom shown by any of
our troops of known symptoms of any chemical contamination and I never received a single report of the Iraqi use of
chemicals." Fisher was considered a confirmed mustard agent casualty by VII Corps, and chemical detection units found
traces of blister compound on his clothes. But Schwarzkopf said the reports were conflicting.
"Yes, it was a chemical burn, no it wasn't a confirmed chemical burn," is how he describes information coming in from the
field. "The final report we got back was that we can't confirm it was a chemical burn." Why didn't Schwarzkopf mention
the case to Senators ? "I wish I had now," he said. "It wasn't a matter of it slipping my mind. I should have said it."
Schwarzkopf said he has referred to the case "over and over again" in "private conversations" and in a 1993 letter to
Rep. Lane Evans, D-IL.
Schwarzkopf also disputed that he ever told officers in 1991 not to treat the Fisher incident as a "big deal." He said there
were "some misinterpretations of my remarks the first night." Schwarzkopf has been the target of veterans activists like
Jim Brown, President of the Desert Storm Justice Foundation, who says the commanding general didn't react to warning
signs.
Brown said the Fisher incident and other warnings should have made the brass more cautious about Khamisiyah, an Iraqi
ammo dump that, when blown up by U.S. troops on March 4, might have exposed 100,000 to chemical agents.
Schwarzkopf said additional protective measures were not ordered because there was no "smoking gun". Pentagon
spokesman Kenneth Bacon said Sunday that "although neither we nor the Presidential Advisory Committee can explain
w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/970915-usa.html

1/2

5/28/25, 5:51 PM

Gulf Illness Treated "Cavalierly" -- Schw arzkopf Says He Made Errors

what causes the illness that some veterans are suffering, we are working hard to provide the best medical care we can
and to conduct research that will help us answer remaining questions."
Return to Gulf Clippings Index ---- Return to Jim Turner's page ----

w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/970915-usa.html

2/2

