5/28/25, 5:50 PM

Gulf War Logs on Chemicals Reported Lost in Office Move

Gulf War Logs on Chemicals Reported Lost in Office Move
By Dana Priest
Washington Post Staff Writer
Friday, October 24, 1997; Page A17
The Washington Post
The Pentagon inspector general has determined that a set of missing chemical weapons logs from the Persian Gulf War -documents veterans' groups say could provide valuable information about possible chemical exposures -- was wrongfully
destroyed by Army officials during an office move after the war. A second set, the report said, is still missing.
But, the inspector general said there is no evidence "to support the theory that any individuals or organization participated
in a conspiracy to destroy or conceal the logs."
Rather, one set of logs at MacDill Air Force Base in Florida were "probably destroyed" when the office that kept the
chemical weapons-related logs for the Central Command, the military command in charge of U.S. forces during the war,
moved. Another computer disk copy of the logs that an officer sent to his office at the Aberdeen Proving Ground in
Maryland after the war, is missing.
The report, released yesterday by the Pentagon, also said an Army officer who helped keep the logs during the war is
under criminal investigation for having taken and kept a classified "log extract" of the original documents at a storage
facility where she kept personal belongings. The "log extract" of 223 entries, contains no information that investigators
believe directly relates to possible chemical releases.
The "CENTCOM logs" are one of the mysteries in the continuing effort to determine whether Gulf War veterans were
exposed to chemicals that could have made them sick years later.
Only 37 pages of the estimated 180 to 210 pages still exist. Among the missing documents are those from March 4 and
March 10, 1994, when U.S. troops blew up Iraqi chemical weapons at a storage depot in southern Iraq.
"It certainly doesn't put this issue to rest," said James Tuite III, a leading activist on Gulf War illness. "If you have the
simultaneous disappearance of logs from two locations, many questions remain."
© Copyright 1997 The Washington Post Company
Return to Gulf Clippings Index ---- Return to Jim Turner's page ----

w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/971024-w p.htm

1/1

