5/28/25, 5:53 PM

House Members Call for Reversal of Presidential Report

June 21, 1997

House Members Call for Reversal of Presidential Report
By PHILIP SHENON

WASHINGTON -- Eighty-six members of the House Friday urged a special White House panel of experts to reverse
itself and conclude that Iraqi chemical weapons were responsible for some of the health problems reported by veterans
of the 1991 Persian Gulf War.
The lawmakers, responding to the draft of a new government report that linked Iraqi nerve gas with the sorts of illnesses
seen among the veterans, said in a letter to the White House committee that "the evidence is clear that exposure to a
wide variety of chemicals in the Persian Gulf may be a significant factor in Persian Gulf illness."
The panel, the Presidential Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans' Illnesses, concluded earlier this year that Iraqi
chemical weapons were probably not responsible for the veterans' health problems, and that it was far more likely the
ailments were linked to wartime stress.
But the panel's findings have been challenged in recent weeks, most significantly by the General Accounting Office, the
investigative arm of Congress, which is expected to release a report next week that will harshly criticize the committee's
investigation.
A draft of the report said there was "substantial evidence" linking nerve gas to the sorts of health problems seen among
the veterans.
The author of the House letter, Rep. Bernard Sanders, I-Vt., said at a news conference Friday that the White House
panel may have overlooked the possibility that chemical weapons had caused the veterans' illnesses because the
committee was "highly dependent" on the Pentagon and the Department of Veterans Affairs "for a lot of its information."
The panel's chairman, Joyce Lashof, the former dean of the public health school at the University of California at
Berkeley, said in a telephone interview that the committee members stand by their findings and that their conclusions
were reached "after an extensive review of the peer-reviewed literature -- we looked at all of these issues."
In a response this month to the General Accounting Office, Lashof said that the draft report was "not worthy to stand
published alongside other GAO efforts," and that "the errors of commission and omission are so serious that the
publication of this draft in its current form would do a disservice to the Congress' and president's efforts to address gulf
war veterans' illnesses."
The Defense Department acknowledged last year that thousands of U.S. troops may have been exposed to Iraqi
chemical weapons as a result of the demolition of a sprawling Iraqi ammunition depot shortly after the war. But Pentagon
officials have been reluctant to link that exposure to the health problems reported by veterans.
"I hate to condemn those people," Sanders said of the White House committee, which includes some prominent scientists
and doctors. "But it's what happens in politics. They are backing themselves into a corner. They are building a wall
around themselves. And I think that's very unfortunate."
The House letter was signed by lawmakers from both parties. "This is absolutely a nonpartisan issue," Sanders said.
w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/0621-nyt.htm

1/2

5/28/25, 5:53 PM

House Members Call for Reversal of Presidential Report

A Pentagon spokesman, Bryan Whitman, said lawmakers were wrong to suggest that the Defense Department was not
aggressively seeking an answer to the health problems of veterans. "We're embarked on a very extensive research
program," Whitman said. "We take very seriously the reports of chemical detections."
The House letter was released as three senior Democrats in the Senate called on the GAO to open a new investigation of
American military doctrine to deal with exposure to low levels of chemical weapons, like those that American troops may
have faced in the gulf war.
The Senators -- Carl Levin of Michigan, ranking Democrat on the Armed Services Committee; Robert Byrd of West
Virginia, ranking Democrat on the Appropriations Committee, and John Glenn of Ohio, ranking Democrat on the
Governmental Affairs Committee -- said in a letter to the GAO that they were concerned "that U.S. military doctrine has
not changed to reflect the lessons learned from the Gulf War experience."
"We believe that the most effective course of action is to prevent the exposures or combination exposures from
occurring," the senators said. "The effectiveness of current technology is questionable."
James Tuite III, a former Senate investigator who is now the director of the Gulf War Research Foundation, said a new
investigation was needed because "the Pentagon's steadfast denial of a cause and effect relationship between exposure
and illness had resulted in policies and doctrine that continue to place our active duty forces in harm's way."
Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
Return to Gulf Clippings Index ---- Return to Jim Turner's page ----

w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/0621-nyt.htm

2/2

