5/28/25, 5:51 PM

Mistrust of Pentagon on Illness In Gulf Grow s, Report Concludes

Mistrust of Pentagon on Illness In Gulf Grows, Report Concludes
By Bill McAllister
Washington Post Staff Writer
Wednesday, September 24, 1997; Page A02
The Washington Post
The Pentagon is failing in a multimillion-dollar effort to salvage its credibility among ailing Persian Gulf War veterans for its
investigations into the possible sources of their illnesses, according to the draft of a final report by a White House
advisory committee.
The report, scheduled to be presented to President Clinton next month, concludes, "Public mistrust about the
government's handling of Gulf War veterans' illnesses not only has endured, but has expanded" in the 10 months since the
Defense Department, at the panel's urging, agreed to intensify its research efforts.
The 35-page draft by the Presidential Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans' Illnesses is highly critical of the
Pentagon's continuing investigations of whether U.S. troops were exposed to chemical warfare agents during the 1991
conflict. It blames the office of the Pentagon's special assistant for Gulf War illnesses for failing to examine reported
incidents thoroughly and suggests the Defense Department may be institutionally incapable of acknowledging that
chemical exposures could have occurred.
Some of the Pentagon's investigations have been "less than superficial," the draft report said. Even when evidence
strongly points to chemical exposures, the Defense Department's evaluation "succumbs to an institutional culture and
pervasive inclination to reimpose" the department's position that no exposure occurred, the report said.
The report's language is much more critical than comments by members of the committee during their final public meeting
in Alexandria earlier this month. Members of the panel then said their report would criticize the Pentagon's role, but they
also said they believed the government was doing a much better job of addressing why thousands of Gulf War veterans
have reported ailments that doctors have been unable to diagnose.
Gary L. Caruso, a spokesman for the committee, said yesterday that the report remains "in the review process" and
declined to discuss any of the panel's conclusions until it is presented to Clinton Oct. 31.
Bryan Whitman, a Pentagon spokesman, expressed disappointment at the report. "We feel the Defense Department has
made some real significant progress," he said, adding that military officials "have not backed away from any event or
issue."
He said the department would oppose any efforts by the committee to remove the Pentagon from investigations into
post-war illnesses. "After all, we're responsible for what happened in Gulf -- the good and bad," he said.
Matthew Puglisi, director for Gulf War programs for the American Legion, expressed concern over the committee's fight
with the Pentagon. "That is an inside-the-Beltway spitball fight," he said.
"What's missing is the concern of Gulf War Veterans. . . . their big issue is medical treatment and compensation for their
illnesses," he said. On both counts, Puglisi said the Department of Veterans Affairs is failing to provide service "in anything
like a timely manner."
The committee report did offer praise for the Department of Veterans Affairs' efforts to care for ailing veterans. The
panel's final report will call for a permanent statutory program to care for the illnesses they suffer and recommend the
White House name an agency other than the Pentagon to supervise the continuing studies into what made the veterans ill.
w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/970924-w p.htm

1/2

5/28/25, 5:51 PM

Mistrust of Pentagon on Illness In Gulf Grow s, Report Concludes

© Copyright 1997 The Washington Post Company
Return to Gulf Clippings Index ---- Return to Jim Turner's page ----

w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/970924-w p.htm

2/2

