5/28/25, 5:49 PM

More Help for Gulf War Veterans on the Way

More Help for Gulf War Veterans on the Way
Clinton Plans Easier Access to Health Care, Panel to Review Research
By Peter Baker and Bill McAllister
Washington Post Staff Writers
Saturday, November 8, 1997; Page A11
The Washington Post
President Clinton will announce a plan today intended to make it easier for veterans to receive health care and other
benefits if they are suffering from illnesses presumably related to service in the Persian Gulf War, administration officials
said yesterday.
The proposal would create a permanent statutory program aimed at Gulf veterans and designed to provide care even if
they cannot prove that their ailments were caused by chemical or biological exposure during the 1991 campaign to get
Iraq out of Kuwait.
The idea for such a program came from the Presidential Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans' Illnesses, which
presented its final report to Clinton yesterday. In a related move, officials said, the White House intends to announce the
creation of a new independent panel to review the government's research into the mysterious illnesses that have eluded
explanation.
Former senator Warren B. Rudman (R-N.H.) will be chairman of the new oversight board, which will have about five
members. Administration sources said another member will be retired Navy Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt; however, his
appointment will not be announced immediately because it is still being vetted.
The oversight board apparently was meant as a response to the advisory committee, which urged Clinton not to allow
either the Defense or Veterans Affairs departments to supervise government research because it believes they bungled
efforts to discover why thousands of veterans have become ill.
The administration is depending on the Rudman and Zumwalt appointments to restore credibility to the government's
investigation and "provide the veterans with the confidence that they should have," as one senior official put it.
Rudman previously was tapped by Defense Secretary William S. Cohen to oversee the Pentagon's Persian Gulf
programs, and Zumwalt, a former chief of naval operations, fought to expand Agent Orange benefits to Vietnam War
veterans.
Under the proposed benefits program, which would require congressional approval, the burden of proof essentially
would shift so that veterans no longer would have to show that their ailments were related to their service in the Middle
East. Instead, according to officials, there would be a presumption that their ailments were caused through their service if
they can demonstrate that such symptoms are more prevalent among those who fought in the Gulf War than among
veterans generally and if there is a scientifically plausible cause.
The National Academy of Sciences will be asked to review existing research and determine whether certain illnesses
show up more commonly in Gulf War veterans than other service members.
Clinton accepted other recommendations as well, including one creating a new comprehensive "force health protection"
program to monitor troops in future conflicts and another earmarking $13 million more for research on low-level
exposure to chemical agents.
w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/971108-w p1.htm

1/2

5/28/25, 5:49 PM

More Help for Gulf War Veterans on the Way

© Copyright 1997 The Washington Post Company
Return to Gulf Clippings Index ---- Return to Jim Turner's page ----

w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/971108-w p1.htm

2/2

