5/28/25, 6:00 PM

Report: Data Kept From Vets / Delay after briefing by CIA on nerve gas

Report: Data Kept From Vets / Delay after briefing by CIA on nerve gas
February 26, 1997 New York Newsday
By Patrick J. Sloyan. WASHINGTON BUREAU
Washington - The Central Intelligence Agency told the White House that U.S. troops had destroyed munitions containing
nerve gas in Iraq five months before the Clinton administration made the information public to ailing veterans of the 1991
Persian Gulf war, according to new Pentagon records made public yesterday.
A newly released CIA document and an interim Pentagon report on U.S. Army operations at an Iraqi ammunition
complex at Khamisiyah in southern Iraq also showed that senior Army and Pentagon officials knew details that were
withheld from the public and Congress.
Until now administration officials have insisted that the possible exposure of U.S. troops to clouds of nerve gas at
Khamisiyah did not become clear until a CIA breakthrough in March, 1996. Three months later, the Pentagon formally
disclosed that at least 20,800 Americans in frontline combat units may have been exposed to low levels of the poison
after U.S. Army engineers destroyed an estimated 2,160 rockets filled with sarin nerve agent.
But yesterday's report by assistant defense secretary Bernard Rostker presented a different picture.
"On 26 January, 1996, the CIA briefed the National Security Council (NSC) staff that U.S. troops probably blew up
chemical weapons at Khamisiyah," the interim Pentagon report said.
Administration officials say the CIA briefed Sandy Berger and his deputy, Robert Bell, on new classified information
compiled by military and intelligence investigators. At the time, Berger was deputy national security adviser to President
Bill Clinton. Berger has since succeeded Anthony Lake to the top National Security Council post. But it was unclear if
Berger and Bell had briefed Clinton. The issue was a potentially controversial one for Clinton, who was embarking on his
re-election campaign.
White House officials had no immediate comment on the new Pentagon report, but officials for Persian Gulf veterans
groups were quick to criticize Clinton. "These revelations are very disturbing," said Paul Sullivan, spokesman for a
coalition of two dozen grass-roots gulf veterans groups in the United States and Britain. "In delaying this information, the
White House also delayed research and treatment for veterans who are ill. The administration had a legal and moral
obligation to make this information public, particularly in light of the large number of gulf vets who are sick."
The Pentagon and the Veterans Affairs Department estimate that 78,000 men and women who served in the gulf share a
variety of ailments known as the Gulf War syndrome. Many veterans suspect that chemical munitions destroyed on the
battlefield contributed to their illnesses.
The briefing for the White House staff was revealed in a chronology prepared for Rostker by CIA executive director
Nora Slatkin. On Sept. 6, 1995, the CIA identified Khamisiyah as one of three sites where chemical munition releases
could have occurred, the Slatkin report said. "Khamisiyah raised special concern because its southerly location put it
closest to U.S. troops," the CIA official said. On Sept. 13, the CIA asked the Defense Department to find U.S. troops
who had been near the 25-square-mile ammunition site.
"DOD searched its unit locator and indicated that some units were in the area," the report said. "Concerns began to
grow."

w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/0226-nnd.htm

1/2

5/28/25, 6:00 PM

Report: Data Kept From Vets / Delay after briefing by CIA on nerve gas

In December, 1995, CIA analysts held another meeting on Khamisiyah. A month later, the report said, the CIA briefed
Clinton's National Security Council staff.
02/26

Return to Gulf Clippings Index ---- Return to Jim Turner's page ----

w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/0226-nnd.htm

2/2

