5/28/25, 5:59 PM

U.S. To Investigate Disappearance of Gulf War Chemical Logs

March 4, 1997

U.S. To Investigate Disappearance of Gulf War Chemical Logs
By PHILIP SHENON

WASHINGTON -- The Pentagon announced Monday that it had asked the Defense Department's inspector general to
investigate the disappearance of most of the chemical-detection logs maintained for U.S. military commanders during the
1991 Persian Gulf war.
It is estimated that 80 percent of the logs have disappeared. That has alarmed the ailing veterans who believe that the
missing logs could show that their health problems are the result of exposure to chemical or biological weapons during
the war.
In a statement, the Pentagon's senior official on gulf war illnesses, Bernard Rostker, said, "I have seen no evidence thus
far that anyone intentionally destroyed the log." He made the statement as he prepared to hand over the investigation to
the inspector general.
The investigation will now be handled by the inspector general, Eleanor Hill, who is supposed to function as an
independent watchdog for the department. The results of Ms. Hill's investigations will be reported to Congress.
In an interim report made public last week, the Defense Department said that its investigators had been able to track
down only 36 of the estimated 200 pages of logs that should have recorded the detection of chemical or biological
weapons during the war.
The report suggested that some logs had been destroyed by a computer virus in the war, while other copies, on
computer disks and on paper, had been misplaced after the war when soldiers changed jobs.
The investigation found that copies of the logs had disappeared from two different locations after the war.
The 36 pages that have been located, which were made public in 1994, show that American military commanders
received repeated warnings that Iraqi chemical weapons had been detected on the battlefield but labeled them all false
alarms.
Among the missing logs are those for March 4 through March 10, when American troops blew up a huge ammunition
depot in southern Iraq that was later determined to have contained tons of chemical weapons.
There is no conclusive evidence to show that American soldiers were made sick by exposure to chemical or biological
weapons during the war. But the disappearance of the chemical logs has heightened an air of suspicion among veterans.
Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
Return to Gulf Clippings Index ---- Return to Jim Turner's page ----

w w w .turnerhome.org/jct/Clips/0304-nyt.htm

1/1

